We use some of James Gunn's material too from that movie things he has from his Kansas,
what is it that, oh I forget what it is, he's got a center there for science studies.
Yeah, I know he did, sorry what Williamson did, gave his collection to the university,
it served as a nucleus for a, and then.
Yeah, he rent some of their little half hour things.
I need you.
Testing one, two, testing.
For the class, I mean not for the show obviously.
Yeah, he's, yeah I understand he has a whole bunch of them, I think I did one years ago,
just a five minute spot type thing.
Right.
Okay, good.
Good advice for it.
It would help you if I took this up on the sheriff with that over there.
No, that's fine, that's fine.
We're doing fine, you know.
Our studio, your office is very neat compared to our studio.
I clean it about once a year, you know, we have a cleaning lady comes in here periodically,
but I never let her in my office, keeping the rest of the house,
she cleans it and I'll be able to find anything.
You're the same with me.
Daryl, you want to go ahead and lead off?
Yeah, David, can you, yeah, start with?
No, go ahead.
Okay.
Mr. Zalazny, first of all, we'd like to talk a little bit about your origins as a science fiction writer.
When you began writing, did you plan on being a science fiction writer or had you considered mainstream writing?
Well, it's a funny thing.
I was originally a reader of science fiction from about the age of eleven on through high school,
and during that period I did write a lot of science fiction stories,
which I tried to sell, but I was like my early teens,
and I didn't really meet with any success at that point,
and I decided actually before that that I'd wanted to be a writer.
I wasn't, it wasn't necessarily science fiction that I had in mind,
though it was science fiction stories that I was writing during the period I was reading them.
When I went to college, I stopped reading science fiction,
just concentrate on the material I had there, and I wrote poetry actually, exclusively.
I decided that I was going to start writing again as soon as I got out of college and had some time,
and at that point I wasn't absolutely certain what it was that I would try writing,
but when the opportunity finally presented itself in early 1962,
I decided it might be easier for me to break into science fiction
since I had read so much of it in the past, knew the area,
so I decided I'd try there first, and I went out and re-familiarized myself with science fiction,
and then I began writing and submitting the stories,
and after about six or seven weeks I sold my first one,
and I sold 16 others that year, so I stayed with it,
and that was, it's been over 18 years now,
so that's how I got in it.
I'm happy I did.
If I had an idea for what I thought was a nice story or something,
that was not science fiction, I wouldn't hesitate to write it,
but I've gotten a certain habit of mine from it over the years,
so that usually I do tend to translate everything into science fiction.
Have you written any mainstream material at all that's been published?
I have had a book of poetry published,
but that's really the only non-science fiction material I've had.
In other words, you did make a conscious decision to become a writer,
and show science fiction as the genre of the form that you wrote.
The decision to be a writer came first a long time ago,
and science fiction was the point of attack for selling,
and so they were in a way two separate decisions,
but yeah, it was a conscious decision.
One more question I have on your origins.
What in your background, say your college background,
or your interests or anything, would have influenced the kind of science fiction you write?
Were there any particular studies or areas that you were interested in
that maybe formed your style or your ideas the way you approached the writing of science fiction?
Oh, that's a really difficult one.
I don't know.
See, my intention was to take a graduate degree and teach while writing on the side.
As things fell out, I wound up with a government job,
and never did use my graduate degree,
but as an undergraduate, I was a psychology major,
and I decided I did not really want to work as a psychologist,
and it occurred to me somewhere along the line that if I'm,
we're simply going to be teaching and writing with the aim in mind of eventually writing full time,
I might as well teach something that would be a little more fun than psychology,
so I switched to English and took my graduate work in English and comparative literature.
There were a number of science courses as electives and so forth.
I have read an awful lot in the sciences, both during and since college.
I don't really know what particular area might have influenced my habits of mind that much.
I read fairly widely.
As I said, it's difficult questions, hard to say.
I was thinking specifically, say your comparative literature background.
Is that where you, oh, I guess get your background in mythology, legend, or that sort of.
Well, my thesis was actually a thing involving the Elizabethan Jack of Ian theater,
but I had always, I read mythology before I read science fiction.
Back before I started reading science fiction when I was 11, I didn't discover it until that point.
Before then, I had always liked things of a rather fabulous nature, so I read a lot of mythology,
and I never stopped reading it.
As I grew older, my tastes got a little more sophisticated and became a little more interested
in the backgrounds and origins of these things.
I went into comparative religions and anthropology just as a personal interest.
This wasn't really the subject of any academic pursuit, per se.
When you first started, or at least about the time that you first started writing science fiction,
or at least getting it published, was the same time that New Style of Writing was becoming predominant, the New Wave.
In some of our talks with other science fiction writers, they've named you as one of the people in the vanguard of the New Wave.
What is your reaction to the New Wave style of writing and how it came about?
Well, it's a different thing when you're right there, because when I began in the early 60s,
I wasn't consciously attempting to react against anything that had gone before.
My virtual hindsight now, the New Wave probably is best defined as a kind of reaction to the earlier science fiction story,
where there was less emphasis on characterization, where the writing was a fairly nuts and bolts type prose,
where stream of consciousness was something that was never used.
All of the impressionistic and expressionistic writing tricks that appeared in, say, Michael Morcox's New Worlds,
or some of the things some of the writers, such as Delaney and Dish, were doing, who came on the scene at about the same time.
To me, none of this was invoked as a kind of reaction to the hard science story, or the extrapolative story.
Looking back on it now, I was simply telling the only story I knew how to tell at that time,
and I wasn't thinking of it in context in terms of the other things that were going on.
I was just purely exercising tunnel vision and writing this sort of story I felt I was able to write.
I suppose, having grown up on the earlier sort of science fiction, the space opera sort of thing of the 30s and 40s too,
and the harder science stories of the 40s and some of the sociological science fiction of the 50s,
and having a background in literature, there's a natural tendency,
whether it's conscious or not, to want to do something different than the things that had gone before.
Also, just a personal idiosyncrasy, in longer pieces of writing, I tend to think of this thing in terms of character usually.
Normally, I get the idea for the characters before I work out a plot, or even conceive of the setting.
As a consequence, my stories, well the first ones were basically gimmick stories,
because it was the easiest way to break in, it was about all that I was capable of doing at the time,
but when I began writing at greater length and when I was a bit sure of myself,
I would think of the characters first, so the stories tended to have more, I suppose, in the way of psychological motivation,
rather than just external characterization, and my writing itself, possibly because of the years I spent writing poetry
and reading general literature tended to be a bit different from some of the earlier things which were kind of journalistic in character,
but I wasn't really aware of this at the time, and there was no conscious revolt against things which had gone before.
It was just a new type of story which was being written at the time, which by virtue of redundant, I'll take this out.
Well, it's kind of funny too, because I think the first story for which I became known was a piece called Rose for Ecclesiastes,
and one of my reasons in writing this is because I was very fond of the earlier space operas and things like this,
where they played John Carter of Mars, and I had always wanted to do something set on the Mars, which existed in these earlier stories,
and I knew at the time I wrote it that it was scientifically impossible at that point.
We already knew enough about Mars to know that the temperature was not the same as I had it in the story,
that the atmosphere was not the same and so forth, but it was close enough to the point where this knowledge was just becoming current,
that I could still get away with doing a thing like that, so I intentionally wrote that and wrote it in the fashion I did.
I always kind of exercised a nostalgia on my part.
I always wanted to do a story set on that kind of Mars, and I knew that if I waited another year or so,
I wouldn't be able to.
The same with Venus for my story, the doors of his face, the lamps of his mouth.
At that point, we already were aware that the surface temperature was about 900 degrees,
but still there was this whole traditional body of science fiction literature,
which had a vast, watery world, misty and so forth, that I really had wanted to use at least once in my life,
so I did those two stories as a kind of tribute to the earlier things.
But then again, I wrote them the way I was writing them, rather than in the older style,
so that they, reading them now, they'd have to be regarded as fantasy rather than science fiction,
because science has already demonstrated that those circumstances don't prevail.
So in a sense, I'm a traditionalist, or at least I'm very fond of the traditions science fiction possesses.
On the other hand, I like to think of myself as a realist, and I do make a distinction,
which I hope my readers make between the pieces I'm writing, which have a fantasy basis,
and the ones I'm writing which are nearer the science fiction side of the spectrum.
I was going to ask if you yourself recognized a dual type of style in your writing.
I've noticed, it seems, some stories that are more of a fantasy and new wave, if you will, nature,
and some that are more of a science fictional nature.
Oh yeah, I do make a distinction myself.
In a science fiction story, everything I feel should be explainable in terms of natural laws,
or extensions of natural laws, as we understand them now.
Whereas in a fantasy story, it's part of the rules of the game,
so I feel there are no compunctions against invoking the supernatural, or bringing in magic,
and things of that sort.
So basically a science fiction story, things are ultimately explainable in a fantasy story.
They're explainable really in terms of something that isn't explainable.
So you've got more of the less rational background, if you push things far enough in a fantasy story.
As long as we're on that topic, maybe we can talk a little bit about one of your books that we admire very much,
The Jack of Shadows. How would you classify that, fantasy or science fiction?
I would have to call it science fantasy really.
I supposed to extend my answer to the previous question, but further, I also believe in mixing the two.
Well, Lord of Light for instance, was a book where I intentionally wrote it to be taken two ways of fantasy.
A fantasy fan could read it as a piece of fantasy, whereas a science fiction fan also had options available to him.
Any single item which occurs in there, which is of an unusual nature, is that there's ultimately an explanation available for it,
if the person cares to use it. If he doesn't, that's fine too.
I also tried to write that book in something more of a fantasy style. The sentences are longer and a bit more convoluted.
There's more figurative language in that book than in some of my others.
With Jack of Shadows, I did intentionally want to try to marry a fantasy idea and a science fiction idea.
I will do such things again if it occurs to me.
It's the same thing in changeling too, the mixture there of science and magic.
Yes, of course there I used the out of the parallel world of course, but still that's the case.
In Jack of Shadows, when the story changes from that of the fantasy world to the abrupt change to that of the highly technological side of the world,
when I was reading that it was almost as if somebody spliced down the middle of the book and all of a sudden here's a different book.
It was a marvelous device used to change the reference point of the person who was reading.
Thank you.
Obviously you did that intentionally, but I really think my question up here.
Was that just kind of a fun writer's trick to do because you knew the person was going to be reading along there and all of a sudden hit this certain portion?
Well, yes, it was fun.
I suppose, yeah, the first thing I thought of when I had the idea for that book actually was an image of that world,
half in light and half in darkness and then the character.
And for a long time I just thought about the character and the plot pretty much unfolded itself.
I have a question on Jack of Shadows too.
I'm not sure how you react to these.
Most authors that I've spoken with are read when they're writing about their own work.
I kind of reluctant to talk about what they mean by something, you know, in terms of theme or intention and so forth.
My question was going to be, oh, I noticed in many of your works you deal with opposites.
I guess a writer can't help, you know, light, dark, science, magic and so forth.
In a lot of cases I think you talk about reconciliation.
Now in the Jack of Shadows, when Jack allows his soul to enter him and he's destroyed the machine at the center of the world which keeps the world from spinning.
Are you saying that science and magic need to be reconciled?
That they can be, they should be.
Or is that just a device to hang a story on?
I did look at it as a kind of reconciliation, not necessarily between science and magic per se,
but science and magic themselves almost being taken as symbolic of the light and the dark and everything.
I mean magic not necessarily have to be magic.
It can represent the dark side of the human mind, the unconscious and so forth as opposed to the rational, logical...
I'll go that far and say, looking at reconciliation there.
And one more question on the end of that book at the end.
When Morningstar reaches down for Jack, I'm certain you meant that to be for a reader to take that however he wanted to.
Is he going to catch Jack and so forth?
I took it as that Jack is now in some sense a whole man.
He's reconciled light and dark, he's gotten his soul.
And Morningstar would be sort of the beginning of a new day, the Morningstar.
But there's a reconciliation, he's going to be saying that Morningstar will catch him.
Would that be a misreading?
No.
I've noticed, you mentioned earlier about how you enjoyed reading mythology.
And you do seem to incorporate a lot of mythology in your work.
Or at least some of it seems to appear pseudo mythology and some of it follows traditional mythology.
Yeah.
I did that more in my earlier writings than I did in recent years because there came a point
where whenever I would attend a science fiction convention or any sort of get together,
I'd usually be asked to appear on a panel with a title like mythology and science fiction.
And I started to feel at that point that I was being typecast as a writer of mythological science fiction.
So I intentionally abandoned it for a time and wrote things such as Doorways in the Sand.
And today we choose faces which do not really contain any overt references to specific mythologies.
This is not to say that I have abandoned it entirely.
I did want to get away from it for a time though to show that I could write other sorts of things.
Now that I have done so, I doubt let's go back and try a few more things using mythology,
perhaps in a different fashion than I have in the past, or some combination of mythology and something else.
Because I do have a certain fondness for this sort of material.
You mentioned the Lord of Light a little bit earlier.
I'm not that familiar with the Hindu or Buddhist mythology.
Was that a retelling of a Hindu myth or did you simply use the names and the structure and put your own details into it?
Both in a way.
There are bits and pieces and excerpts there from a great number of different elements in Hinduism.
Religion is one of these vast bodies of material where they, in a way, never really discarded anything.
Just kept adding so that it grew to quite sizable proportions over the centuries.
So that it's kind of a vast mine of materials.
I took the elements that were most suitable for the story I wanted to tell.
However, I did use the historical instance there of the situation involving the development of Buddhism itself as a reaction,
really to the earlier religion of the Brahmins,
and thought that it would be interesting to, in a way, follow that course by having my character who intended to rebel against the situation
similar to that in old India, do so by similar means by setting up Buddhism as a reaction to it.
So there's that element and then the various trappings of the stories themselves do have their sources,
but there is no one consecutive linear narrative that parallels Lord of Light, in that sense.
Would you consider yourself a fan of pure fantasy like the works of Tolkien and so forth?
Oh yes, I read both. It varies from day to day what my mood is, what I most like.
Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays I like fantasy, and Thursdays, Thursdays and Saturdays science fiction.
Sundays a day of rest, but no, I read both. I like both.
My own reading pleasure, it doesn't matter that much.
Let's talk about Amber for a while. We're all great fans of your Amber series too.
I wonder, first of all, how you got involved in such an extended narrative.
Was that in terms of a serialization of it that kept going, or was it something you'd planned to be five volumes from the start?
Well, no, I had no idea how long it was going to be when I started it.
I didn't even know what the story was about when I started it.
I have two ways of composing a book. One is when I'm in a hurry, I will outline and follow it.
I can write fairly quickly. I never follow an outline point for point. I always depart from it,
but if I have an outline I can proceed pretty quickly.
The other method is when I have more time on my hands,
I am willing to start writing a story with a main character and a couple incidents in mind,
with about 10 or 15% of a story.
Nine Princes and Amber was such a thing. I thought of Corwin, I thought of that opening situation,
and I thought I won't go any further in working it out. I'll just start writing.
The story really told itself for about the first quarter or third of the book
before I reached a point where I asked myself where I was going.
At that point I had enough material from what had gone before so that I could push the book along farther.
I realized somewhere after that that it was going to have to be more than one book.
The economics of the situation in those days were that a writer would be better off financially doing
several shorter books than one long one, just in terms of the advances and so forth.
I ended Nine Princes and Amber where I did and immediately began work on the second book
for which I did not have a title at that point. I wrote about a quarter of it before I stopped
and went on and wrote other things. I sold Nine Princes and Amber and it wasn't until a few years later
when I needed another book to fulfill an open contract with Double Day that I took the quarter of the second book
I had written, sat down, thought about it more carefully, saw that it was going to have to be more than just a second book,
wrote it, sent it in. At that point I had more in the way of an idea as to where the total action was headed
but I still did not know how many books would be involved. I thought at some points that I might be able to wind it up
as a trilogy than at others I saw half a dozen or so.
I'd even toyed with the idea of telling it from different characters' points of view rather than just following Corwin.
I was going to try a sort of Alexandria quartet thing where I told the same story over several times
but colored by various characters' points of view and only advancing it slightly.
For that sort of story though it didn't seem the best thing and the only thing that survived of that in the series itself
was the automobile accident to which I kept returning and re-explaining and redefining as more things came to light.
When I finished the third book I still, I thought possibly I could wind it up in four
but obviously as you've read them it took five.
So that was one of the books, a sort of called a free association novel as opposed to an outlined novel.
Is it finished at five or is there possibly a sixth one on the horizon?
There is possibly a sixth one. I have made no commitments. I do not have a plot
but I've been talking about it and thinking about it publisher.
It is possible when I get a few things out of the way that I'm writing now that I might go on into a sixth one.
But so far as the five books that now exist are concerned, that story is told.
That was the story I had in mind. Anything which would continue the series would probably take off in a new direction.
It could possibly be from another character's point of view.
As I said I don't have a story in mind so I won't speculate myself.
I felt like there were still a few unanswered questions particularly in terms of the patterns that were now conflicting.
Do I understand that correctly that the original pattern was reconstructed?
So there are now two patterns.
Side by side and we don't know what the interference or compatibility of those are.
Right.
That's what made me think there might possibly be another one on the future.
Hang on here we might do a little explanation on those patterns. Some of the people might not know what that means.
Could you explain a little bit about what the patterns are that they walk in amber?
There are kind of central images to this series of books.
It is a kind of archetypal design which exists in the real world.
Amber of which our own earth and a great variety of shadings and variations thereof exist.
Amber is the real world earth and the others are referred to as shadow.
Our shadow in the story is the background, the basis of reality.
In amber is this design called the pattern which was inscribed by an ancestor of the clan.
About whom the story is told.
Only a person of the blood of the royal family of amber is able to walk this pattern and not be destroyed by it.
In the course of walking the pattern at some point in his early life,
amberite acquires the ability to walk through the various shadow worlds which surround amber so that he can travel through an infinity of possibilities to virtually any world he desires.
If the pattern itself were destroyed it would in a sense be the end of the world.
This does figure in the narrative itself.
In a sense that is a heroic fantasy in some ways.
Isn't it Corwin is swordsman, he's fighting for the throne, magic works.
It's in the tradition of heroic fantasy.
Yes, I would say whenever I try anything of this sort I try to give it an extra twist is what it is.
Basically I look at it myself as a kind of heroic fantasy with a few variations that don't usually occur in that sort of literature.
Do you have a large fan following that keeps you going on some of these projects?
Oh I do get letters saying whether they liked or disliked something came out and asking what I have coming out and what I might be engaged in writing at the moment and yeah there are a number of people who...
What's the reaction to amber been from readers?
I have gotten more fan letters on the amber books than anything else I have ever written.
There was a period of a couple of years there where I was getting several letters a week on the amber books.
So they sold well too in other words the publishers would be interested in a continuation perhaps for that reason.
Yeah, about a million copies of all five amber books and a great number of foreign editions too.
Can you use some more amber?
Nope.
We like it.
We have about eight minutes tape on there maybe.
You got a whole box full.
No, we have time to take weeks in here all day.
We won't.
If that's enough on amber I had another book that I enjoyed very much is This Immortal.
Was that called Call Me Conrad?
Yes, that was my first novel and Call Me Conrad was my title and the title under which it appeared in when it was originally serialized in magazine of fantasy and science fiction.
And it was that shorter version of it which received the Hugo that following year.
And when it was sold to Ace, they're the ones who applied the shorter title.
They like pithy things which are obviously identified as science fiction or fantasy.
Was that your most extensive use of Greek myth as a background?
Yes.
I wondered how much you'd molded that on the Greeks.
For instance, Conrad himself, I'm not sure I'm saying this word correctly, but was the Call of Conzoroy?
Oh, yeah.
Was that an actual?
Call of Conzoroy.
This is a kind of survival of Pan and the Sator figures which I first encountered actually in the early writings of Lawrence Dural.
He travels in the Greek Isles in the Prospero's cell and reflections on a marine Venus.
He was referring to the various peasant superstitions and what have you which still exists in the Greek Isles in the 30s when he was living there.
And the Call of Conzoroy's figure cropped up and went into a bit of an explanation.
And that sort of remained with me.
And when I wrote this book, it just occurred to me as might be appropriate.
I wondered why you'd use that particular figure though.
Conrad seems to be sort of the savior of us if you want to put it that way.
In fact, he gets sort of the administrative of it at the end of the book.
And he works to retain the history and the past of Earth.
I wondered why that figure would be appropriate for such a function.
I mean, more of a godlike figure to me would seem to be more...
Well, I sense that that figure though is a survival from a much earlier time.
And so is he.
It is...
There is also a Dionysiac element in Conrad which this represents.
He is not a completely...
Might as well go ahead and keep using Nietzsche's terminology.
Not completely an Apollonian figure.
He had been a revolutionary at one point.
While he's preserving the Earth now, there had been a point when he had been blowing up cities and assassinating people.
He is intended to be a complex character with both these elements in him.
At this moment in his life, he is having a role forced upon him.
Or he is ultimately going to be the rational...
The figure representing order.
But he had not always been so.
And the Galakanzaros, let's see...
Representative of the other part of his personality, which we first meet him.
I don't know if that completely answers your question, but...
I have one more question.
I was just a little uncertain about his origins.
At one point I thought that he had originated...
He had been left on a hillside, had a clubfoot like Oedipus in some ways.
I had the impression that he had originated after that war.
He was one of the mutants.
And on the other hand, he seems to go back further than that, way back.
Was there a point in the book where you had specified his origins or was that meant to be a little ambiguous?
It was meant to be a bit ambiguous.
But he was almost or in essence immortal.
Yes.
On the topic of immortality are very long-lived characters.
Many of your characters in your stories are very long-lived.
Why is it that you use this device?
Because I feel comfortable with and enjoy writing about characters who...
have a vast body of experience to draw upon.
Who are very conversant in a great number of areas of history and literature in the sciences.
This sort of highly developed intellect, though, is generally the product of a great number of years in the cultivation.
And if I were to use a character, say, at the age of a person would normally acquire that sort of background,
he'd be too feeble to engage in the activities most of my characters have to engage in,
if the basis were a normal human lifespan we use today.
I got around that in Doorways in the Sand.
By making my protagonist a person who had been an undergraduate actively taking courses full-time for about 13 years.
So that while he was still young enough to climb buildings, he had a sort of force-fed rate acquired.
The kind of...
sensibility I wanted him to possess.
But in a way it is a trick for matching a sufficiently young physique with a sufficiently large intellect.
I noticed in Corwin and Jack and Jack of Shadows a lot of similarities in some of the main characters.
I'm wondering if you put a lot of your own self into some of these protagonists,
if maybe they're kind of an alter ego for you or something like that.
I suppose it's unavoidable to...
I mean, it can't help but put something of yourself into anything you write,
even if it's... even if you're trying to be completely objective.
So to an extent I am present in all of my characters.
To what degree, though I am not absolutely certain, I mean I have written stories with characters.
I am of whom I'm not particularly fond.
On the other hand, no one is completely satisfied with themselves.
So I don't... yes, to some extent I am there.
I would even say is that...
I'm not sure you'd agree with this or not, but I would say there's almost a typical Zalazany hero,
almost like a Hemingway hero.
Sometimes he's immortal, usually a loner, highly literate, sophisticated, knowledgeable, able.
I find that in many of your stories.
Maybe sort of a cynicism too, going along with the sophistication.
Yes, it's hard to get away from that, I guess.
It may be an example of something Gore Vidal once said,
the effect that every author has a certain cast of characters, like a stock company,
and they play different roles in different stories,
but he only has a limited number of people he can introduce at different ages.
On the other hand, I don't like thinking that...
I think there is some truth in this, but I also think that hopefully,
just by virtue of the fact that people do change,
one can add a few more characters here and there over the years to the company.
Bring about further development than the ones who are resident players.
To answer your question simply, I'd say yes, you're probably right.
Just as a sort of a post-cript to that, the Isle of the Dead, Francis Sando,
I thought you must have had a lot of fun constructing him.
To me, he has many of the elements that I see in your fiction,
and other characters all sort of drawn together.
He has almost an ideal job, unlimited funds, near immortality, highly sophisticated,
literate, all of that.
I thought there must have been a lot of yourself going into that kind of a construction.
I was very happy with that.
I enjoyed it, it was a character.
Was that an actual mythology you were working with there when you made out the...
What was it, Shimbled, the Shaker of Thunder?
In fact, he was a god too when you come right down.
Was that one that you constructed yourself?
Yes, yes.
If there are any parallels that were unintentional...
mythology being what it is, I'm sure someone can find parallels somewhere,
but it was not by design.
Are we still rolling, dude? How much time do you have left?
I was mistaken, we had a lot more than eight minutes before.
I was seeing a reflection. We have about five minutes on there now.
Well, okay, let me ask another question.
I've long grown this Tavi Gallinger, the Rose for Ecclesiastes.
In many ways, he's the same as some of these other characters, except of course he's not immortal.
But he has more of a...
I'm not sure this is the right word to use, but I would almost say a bitterness
about him. He actually, I guess, saves the remnants of the Martian culture.
He teaches, inspires them to want to continue to exist, but himself,
he tries to commit suicide at the end.
This is bitterness come because he himself is lacking something
that he can give to others, but yet he doesn't have himself.
I'm not sure that's an awkward question or not.
There was a bitterness about him.
Yes, yes there was.
He is not completely typical.
So if we were talking about a typical Zolaasny character,
it is hard to go back and recall everything that went into him.
But, yeah, certainly there was more in the way of bitterness.
But he's very positive in that he saves the remnants of the Martian culture.
He goes out of his way and extends himself greatly to have them to continue to exist.
He gives them something, gives them the rose.
He shows them that they can still be fertile, that there's a reason to continue to live,
yet he doesn't want to.
I don't know, maybe that's true life.
I'm not sure, but he seemed to have a positive...
But yet himself, he seems to be a negative personality in terms of his own life.
In some ways, yes, there is.
Well, he is a complex character.
There's not too much more I can say about him, though.
Well, one final question on that story.
I may have missed something, but this is probably just a plot device.
But the breeding of the two different races, how that could be possible.
Oh, genetically, no, I couldn't.
It was, as I said, in response to one of the earlier things that I intentionally was writing this in the way as a tribute to the earlier view of Mars in the pulp magazines,
where this sort of thing was possible.
And that was purely the introduction of an outworn convention as a plot device.
I just assumed the reader would...
I cannot consider that story science fiction.
I mean, it is fantasy, really, in that sense.
But no, I am aware of the genetic impossibility of the situation in the first place,
unless the races had had a common origin or something.
But I did it anyway.